![Maui](images/maui_crop.png)
Image by Ross Harder

# MAUI: Modeling, Analysis, and Ultrafast Imaging

A [DOE LDRD](http://science.energy.gov/lp/laboratory-directed-research-and-development) project
researching the combination of light source imaging and molecular dynamics modeling through the
common language of data analysis. In conjunction with the Argonne National Laboratory [Integrated Imaging Initiative](http://www.anl.gov/imaging).

## Investigators

Tom Peterka (MCS), Ian McNulty (NST), Nicola Ferrier (MCS), Ross Harder (XSD), Todd Munson
(MCS), Sven Leyffer (MCS), Subramanian Sankaranarayanan (NST), and Haidan Wen (XSD)

## Postdocs

Kiran Sasikumar (NST), Mathew Cherukara (XSD), and Youssef Nashed (MCS)

--------------

## Scientific Opportunity

Integrating ultrafast time-resolved imaging with large-scale molecular dynamics modeling and in
situ data analysis and visualization in order to design, conduct, and understand spatiotemporal
measurements can provide crucial insights for energy research. The temporal behavior of in situ
externally stimulated materials beyond equilibrium can lead to breakthroughs, for example, in
heat dissipation of next-generation semiconductors, conversion of wasted heat into electricity
in thermoelectric materials, and electrochemical processes across liquid-solid interfaces in
water purification.  All these diverse applications share a common behavior: they transport
energy through phonons (sound waves that carry heat) in a time-evolving crystal lattice. We
anticipate that our integrated approach to predict, image, and analyze phonon dynamics can be
applied to other externally stimulated (for example, heated, pressurized, laser-pumped,
acid-dissolved, or electromagnetically induced) systems measured by various imaging techniques
including x-ray, electron, and optical microscopy.

## Context

Computing capability in molecular dynamics is growing exponentially at leadership computing
facilities. Likewise, new analysis and visualization techniques for 4D and higher-dimensional
data are being researched.  Recently, experimentalists have begun to conduct imaging in
time-evolving lattice dynamics.  demonstrated a ``pump-probe'' experiment, whereby an infrared
laser pumps (pulses) the material sample followed by x-ray diffraction probes at various times
after the pump event.  Never before, however, have all three efforts---forward modeling
through atomistic simulations, multimodal imaging, and reverse modeling through reconstruction
and analysis---been combined in an interoperable method that provides iterative feedback from
each component to the others.  In the context of the APS upgrade for transformational sciences,
this proposal addresses the need for high speed, high-volume data processing for novel
time-resolved imaging; and it aligns with other Argonne strategic directions in hard x-ray
sciences and advanced computing.

## Benefits

Lattice vibrations in individual nanoparticles affect phase transitions, bond
softening/hardening, ferroelectricity, solid/liquid interfaces, heat dissipation, phononic
local structure, phase front propagation, and spectrometry.  Understanding such phenomena can
enable energy applications such as photocatalysis, photonics, thermoelectrics, semiconductor
design, groundwater photo remediation, and heat transfer in battery solute-solvent
interfaces. Moreover, integrating forward modeling and inverse reconstruction with experiment
will enable improved utilization of facilities at the APS and CNM. The most basic properties of
the measured images, for example, where and how frequently to measure, can be aided by
atomistic modeling and near-real-time data analysis. Likewise, the veracity of simulated
results, crucial for the outcome of the experiments, will be improved by timely analysis of
reconstructed images. Although we will concentrate on x-ray coherent diffractive imaging (CDI),
we anticipate that other imaging methods (such as optical and electron microscopy) used to
observe time-resolved in situ experiments can benefit from the product of our research.

## Approach

We will focus on two energy materials problems: (1) heat dissipation in aqueous solution of
nanoparticles upon laser heating for water purification, and (2) heat transport in nonaqueous
battery electrolytes (alkyl carbonates) containing diamond nanoparticles for efficient thermal
management.  In the context of these problems, we will combine three individual components,
molecular dynamics modeling, ultrafast imaging, and data analysis/visualization, through the
development of common data models and data adapters that will facilitate the data movement
between components and will innovate each individual component.
